Copyediting of the HTTP/2 Chapter (#334)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2019/http2.md

This was enhanced in HTTP/1.0 to add *HTTP headers*, so various pieces of meta data could be included in addition to the request (such as what browser it is, the formats it understands etc.) These HTTP headers were also text-based and separated by newline characters. Servers parsed the incoming requests by reading the request and any HTTP headers line by line, and then the server responded, with its own HTTP response headers and the actual resource being requested.

The protocol seemed simple, but that also meant certain limitations - the main one being that HTTP was basically synchronous: once an HTTP request had been sent, the whole TCP connection was basically off limits for anything else until the response had come back, been read and processed. This was incredibly inefficient and required multiple TCP connections (browsers typically use 6) to allow a limited form of parallelization.

> 

Reviewer: A key part of being able to roll out SPDY and HTTP/2 was that Google controlled both sides of the connection, but see you cut that piece of text. Don't think this is worth including?

Author: It felt quite lengthy, so maybe just include a more concise explanation for this part?

Reviewer: Fair enough. You're right it is quite lengthy so let's see if others have any comments and, if not, then go with what you did here.

Reviewer 2: More content the merrier IMO. It's on-point so LGTM.

> That in itself brings its own issues as TCP connections take time and resources to set up and get to full efficiency, especially when using HTTPS which requires additional encryption, which is also standard nowadays. HTTP/1.1 improved this somewhat, allowing reuse of TCP connections for subsequent requests, but still did not solve the parallelization issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That in itself brings its own issues as TCP connections take time and resources to set up and get to full efficiency, especially when using HTTPS which requires additional steps to set up the encryption. HTTP/1.1 improved this somewhat, allowing reuse of TCP connections for subsequent requests, but still did not solve the parallelization issue.
```

> Despite HTTP being text-based, the reality is that it was rarely used to transport text, at least in its raw format. While it was true that HTTP headers were still text, the payloads themselves often were not. Text files like HTML, JS and CSS are usually [compressed](https://almanac.httparchive.org/en/2019/compression) for transport into a binary format using gzip, brotli or similar, and non-text files like images, videos, etc. are served in their own formats. The whole HTTP message is then often wrapped in HTTPS to encrypt the messages for security reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite HTTP being text-based, the reality is that it was rarely used to transport text, at least in its raw format. While it was true that HTTP headers were still text, the payloads themselves often were not. Text files like HTML, JS and CSS are usually [compressed](./compression) for transport into a binary format using gzip, brotli or similar, and non-text files like images, videos, etc. are served in their own formats. The whole HTTP message is then often wrapped in HTTPS to encrypt the messages for security reasons.
```

So, the web had basically moved on from text-based transport a long time ago, but HTTP had not. One reason for this stagnation was because it was so difficult to introduce any breaking changes to such a ubiquitous protocol like HTTP (previous efforts had tried and failed). Many routers, firewalls, and other middleboxes understood HTTP and would react badly to major changes to it. Upgrading them all to support a new version was simply not possible.

In 2009, Google announced that they were working on an alternative to the text-based HTTP called [SPDY](https://www.chromium.org/spdy), which has since been deprecated. This would take advantage of the fact that HTTP messages were often encrypted in HTTPS, which prevents them being read and interfered with en route.

> Google's idea was to pack HTTP messages into a proprietary format, send them across the internet, and then unpack them on the other side. The proprietary format, SPDY, was binary-based rather than text-based. This solved some of the main performance problems with HTTP/1.1 by allowing more efficient use of a single TCP connection, negating the need to open the six connections that had become the norm under HTTP/1.1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Google controlled one of the most popular browsers (Chrome) and some of the most popular websites (Google, YouTube, Gmail...etc.) - so both ends of the connection when both were used together. Google's idea was to pack HTTP messages into a proprietary format, send them across the internet, and then unpack them on the other side. The proprietary format, SPDY, was binary-based rather than text-based. This solved some of the main performance problems with HTTP/1.1 by allowing more efficient use of a single TCP connection, negating the need to open the six connections that had become the norm under HTTP/1.1.
```

## Adoption of HTTP/2
As mentioned above, Internet Protocols are often difficult to adopt since they are ingrained into so much of the infrastructure that makes up the internet. This makes introducing any changes slow and difficult. IPv6 for example has been around for 20 years but has [struggled to be adopted](https://www.google.com/intl/en/ipv6/statistics.html).

HTTP/2 however, was different as it was effectively hidden in HTTPS (at least for the browser uses cases), removing barriers to adoption as long as both the browser and server supported it. Browser support has been very strong for some time and the advent of auto updating *evergreen* browsers has meant that an estimated [95% of global users now support HTTP/2](https://caniuse.com/#feat=http2).

For this Web Almanac, we used HTTP Archive which runs a Chrome web crawler on approximately 5 million of the top websites on both desktop and mobile, with a slightly different set for each device. Our analysis shows that HTTP/2 usage is now the majority protocol - an impressive feat just 4 short years after formal standardization:

> ![](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/raw/master/src/static/images/2019/20_HTTP_2/http2usage.png)

Author: Yes please revert any of these instances where possible - I missed one of your merges as I didn't do all my editing for this chapter in one sitting.

> ![](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/raw/master/src/static/images/2019/20_HTTP_2/http2usage.png)

Reviewer: Yeah sorry about that. Should have held off until you were done 🤦‍♂️. It was part of a larger commit so reverting is tricky. Happy for you to force push this and I'll add them back in later if you're cool with that?

Spotted a couple of technical changes I need to make to the HTML to get it to work on mobile anyway but will hold off until this is finished to avoid more merge fun! 😊

**Figure 5 - Servers used for HTTP/2**

> Nginx provides package repos that allow ease of installing or upgrading to the latest version, so it is no surprise to see it leading the way here. Cloudflare is the most popular [CDN](https://almanac.httparchive.org/en/2019/cdn) and enables HTTP/2 by default, so again it is not surprising to see it hosts a large percentage of HTTP/2 sites. Incidently, Cloudflare uses [a heavily customised version of nginx as their web server](https://blog.cloudflare.com/nginx-structural-enhancements-for-http-2-performance/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nginx provides package repos that allow ease of installing or upgrading to the latest version, so it is no surprise to see it leading the way here. Cloudflare is the most popular [CDN](./cdn) and enables HTTP/2 by default, so again it is not surprising to see it hosts a large percentage of HTTP/2 sites. Incidently, Cloudflare uses [a heavily customised version of nginx as their web server](https://blog.cloudflare.com/nginx-structural-enhancements-for-http-2-performance/).
```

## Impact of HTTP/2
The impact of HTTP/2 is a much more difficult-to-measure statistic, especially using the HTTP Archive methodology. Ideally, sites should be crawled with both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2 and the difference measured, but that is not possible with the statistics we are investigating here. Additionally, measuring whether the average HTTP/2 site is faster than the average HTTP/1.1 site introduces too many other variables that require a more exhaustive study than we can cover here.

One impact that can be measured is in the changing use of HTTP now we are in an HTTP/2 world. Multiple connections were a workaround with HTTP/1.1 to allow a limited form of parallelization, but this is in fact the opposite of what usually works best with HTTP/2. A single connection reduces the overhead of TCP setup, TCP slow start and HTTPS negotiation, and also allows the potential of cross-request prioritization.

HTTP Archive measures the number of TCP connections per page, and that is dropping steadily as more sites support HTTP/2 and use its single connection instead of 6 separate connections:

> ![](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/raw/master/src/static/images/2019/20_HTTP_2/TCPconnections.png)

Author: Sorry this was a copy and paste from an earlier merge error!

> ![](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/raw/master/src/static/images/2019/20_HTTP_2/TCPconnections.png)

Reviewer: As per above will fix later.

**Figure 8 - [TCP connections per page](https://httparchive.org/reports/state-of-the-web#tcp)**

Bundling assets to obtain fewer requests was another HTTP/1.1 workaround that went by many names: bundling, concatenation, packaging, spriting, etc. This is less necessary when using HTTP/2 as there is less overhead with requests, but it should be noted that requests are not free in HTTP/2, and [those that experimented with removing bundling completely have noticed a loss in performance](https://engineering.khanacademy.org/posts/js-packaging-http2.htm). Looking at the number of requests loaded per page over time, we do see a slight decrease in requests, rather than the expected increase:

> ![](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/raw/master/src/static/images/2019/20_HTTP_2/numresources.png)

Reviewer: As per above will fix later.

The fact that the number of requests is staying roughly static, and against the background of an ever-increasing [page weight](https://almanac.httparchive.org/en/2019/page-weight) is interesting, though perhaps not entirely related to HTTP/2.

## HTTP/2 Push
HTTP/2 push has a mixed history despite being a much-hyped new feature of HTTP/2. The other features were basically under the hood performance improvements, but push was a brand-new concept that completely broke the single request to single response nature of HTTP up until then. It allowed extra responses to be returned: when you asked for the web page, the server could respond with the HTML page as usual, but then also send you the critical CSS and JavaScript, thus avoiding any additional round trips for certain resources. It would, in theory, allow us to stop inlining CSS and JavaScript into our HTML, and still get the same performance gains of doing so. After solving that, it could potentially lead to all sorts of new and interesting use cases.

> 

Reviewer: Cut out a large proportion of text here (from "Often the browser.." to "...pushed at all!"). Was that intentional?

Author: Yes was just trying to trim down the chapter where possible as it goes in to a lot more detail than a lot of the others I've seen, which is great! But may appear unbalanced as a whole if one chapter is a lot more of a deep-dive than others? There were also some sections which went into a lot of detail around the context of HTTP/2 that the emphasis was on that rather than the data itself.

Feel free to add back in things I've cut, but I'd recommend trimming them down if possible. Just my opinion, but would be curious to get yours and @rviscomi 's thoughts on the overall chapter balance issue 👍

Reviewer: Fair point. Will leave this here for others to commit then we can accept what you have if no further comments. And yeah it definitely is a wordier chapter than some of the others! Can't stop myself sometimes 😊

Reviewer 2: IMO the extra detail is great. The minimum expectation is to talk about the stats, but "the state of X" (for each chapter about X) also encompasses a lot of other qualitative context of X that would be nice to capture in prose. It does introduce some inconsistency with other chapters but that's ok. Just my opinion but I'll defer to what everyone else feels strongly about.

The fact that the number of requests is staying roughly static is interesting, given the ever-increasing [page weight](./page-weight), though perhaps this is not entirely related to HTTP/2.

## HTTP/2 Push
HTTP/2 push has a mixed history despite being a much-hyped new feature of HTTP/2. The other features were basically performance improvements under the hood, but push was a brand new concept that completely broke the single request to single response nature of HTTP. It allowed extra responses to be returned; when you asked for the web page, the server could respond with the HTML page as usual, but then also send you the critical CSS and JavaScript, thus avoiding any additional round trips for certain resources. It would, in theory, allow us to stop inlining CSS and JavaScript into our HTML, and still get the same performance gains of doing so. After solving that, it could potentially lead to all sorts of new and interesting use cases.

> The reality has been, well, a bit disappointing. HTTP/2 push has proved much harder to use effectively than originally envisaged. Some of this has been due to [the complexity of how HTTP/2 push works](https://jakearchibald.com/2017/h2-push-tougher-than-i-thought/), and the implementation issues due to that. A bigger concern is that push can quite easily cause, rather than solve, performance issues. Over-pushing is a real risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reality has been, well, a bit disappointing. HTTP/2 push has proved much harder to use effectively than originally envisaged. Some of this has been due to [the complexity of how HTTP/2 push works](https://jakearchibald.com/2017/h2-push-tougher-than-i-thought/), and the implementation issues due to that.

A bigger concern is that push can quite easily cause, rather than solve, performance issues. Over-pushing is a real risk. Often the browser is in the best place to decide *what* to request, and just as crucially *when* to request it but HTTP/2 push puts that responsibility on the server. Pushing resources that a browser already has in its cache, is a waste of bandwidth (though in my opinion so is inlining CSS but that gets must less of a hard time about that than HTTP/2 push!).

[Proposals to inform the server about the status of the browser cache have stalled](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/ietf-http-wg/2019JanMar/0033.html) especially on privacy concerns. Even without that problem, there are other potential issues if push is not used correctly. For example, pushing large images and therefore holding up the sending of critical CSS and JavaScript will lead to slower websites than if you'd not pushed at all!
```

<figcaption>Figure 12. What asset types is push used for?</figcaption>
</figure>

Figure 12 shows us which assets are most commonly pushed. JavaScript and CSS are the overwhelming majority of pushed items, both by volume and by bytes. After this, there is a ragtag assortment of images, fonts, and data. At the tail end we see around 100 sites pushing video, which may be intentional, or it may be a sign of over-pushing the wrong types of assets!

One concern raised by some is that HTTP/2 implementations have repurposed the preload HTTP `link` header as a signal to push. One of the most popular uses of the preload [resource hint](./resource-hints) is to inform the browser of late-discovered resources, like fonts and images, that the browser will not see until the CSS has been requested, downloaded, and parsed. If these are now pushed based on that header, there was a concern that reusing this may result in a lot of unintended pushes.

> However, the relatively low usage of fonts and images may mean that risk is not being seen as much as was feared. `<link rel="preload" ... >` tags are often used in the HTML rather than HTTP `link` headers and the meta tags are not a signal to push. Statistics in the [Resource Hints](./resource-hints) chapter show that fewer than 1% of sites use the preload HTTP `link` header, and about the same amount use preconnect which has no meaning in HTTP/2, so this would suggest this is not so much of an issue. Though there are a number of fonts and other assets being pushed, which may be a signal of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the relatively low usage of fonts and images may mean that risk is not being seen as much as was feared. `<link rel="preload" ... >` tags are often used in the HTML rather than HTTP `link` headers and the meta tags are not a signal to push. Statistics in the [Resource Hints](./resource-hints) chapter show that fewer than 1% of sites use the preload HTTP `link` header, and about the same amount use preconnect which has no meaning in HTTP/2, so this would suggest this is not so much of an issue. Though there are a number of fonts and other assets being pushed, which may be a signal of this.

As a counter argument to those complaints, if an asset is important enough to preload, then it could be argued these assets should be pushed if possible as browsers treat a preload hint as very high priority requests anyway. Any performance concern is therefore (again arguably) at the overuse of preload, rather than the resulting HTTP/2 push that happens because of this.
```

![](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/raw/master/src/static/images/2019/20_HTTP_2/whatpushisusedfor.png)

**Figure 12 - What asset types is push used for?**

JavaScript and CSS are the overwhelming majority of pushed items, both by volume and by bytes. After this, there is a ragtag assortment of images, fonts, data, etc. At the tail end we see around 100 sites pushing video - which may be intentional, or may be a sign of over-pushing the wrong types of assets!

One concern raised by some is that HTTP/2 implementations have repurposed the preload HTTP link header as a signal to push. One of the most popular uses of the preload resource hint is to inform the browser of late-discovered resources, like fonts and images, that the browser will not see until the CSS has been requested, downloaded and parsed. If these are now pushed based on that header, there was a concern that reusing this may result in a lot of unintended pushes.

> However, the relatively low usage of fonts and images may mean that risk is not being seen as much as was feared. `<link rel="preload" ... >` tags are often used in the HTML rather than HTTP link headers and the meta tags are not a signal to push. Statistics in the [Resource Hints](https://almanac.httparchive.org/en/2019/resource-hints) chapter show that less than 1% of sites use the preload HTTP link header, and about the same amount use preconnection which has no meaning in HTTP/2, so this would suggest this is not so much of an issue. Though there are a number of fonts and other assets being pushed, which may be a signal of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the relatively low usage of fonts and images may mean that risk is not being seen as much as was feared. `<link rel="preload" ... >` tags are often used in the HTML rather than HTTP link headers and the meta tags are not a signal to push. Statistics in the [Resource Hints](https://almanac.httparchive.org/en/2019/resource-hints) chapter show that less than 1% of sites use the preload HTTP link header, and about the same amount use preconnect which has no meaning in HTTP/2, so this would suggest this is not so much of an issue. Though there are a number of fonts and other assets being pushed, which may be a signal of this.
```

To get around this unintended push, you can provide the `nopush` attribute in your preload header:

    link: </assets/jquery.js>; rel=preload; as=script; nopush

It looks like 5% of preload HTTP headers do make use of this attribute, which is higher than I would have expected as I would have considered this a niche optimization. Then again, so is the use of preload HTTP headers and/or HTTP/2 push itself!

## Issues
HTTP/2 is mostly a seamless upgrade that, once your server supports it, you can switch on with no need to change your website or application. Of course, you can optimize for HTTP/2 or stop using HTTP/1.1 workarounds as much, but in general, a site will usually work without needing any changes - it will just be faster. There are a couple of gotchas to be aware of, however, that can impact any upgrade, and some sites have found these out the hard way.

> 

Reviewer: As per above will fix later.
